## 3. Tips

#### A. Data Encryption
Data encryption is the process of encoding information, thus preventing others from accessing it without the proper key.

Doing this, we can communicate with someone else without having third parties reading the messages we exchange (or at least not directly), and to protect stored information. There is a whole scientific branch studying the systems that make this kind of communication possible: cryptography.

As we said, cryptography is used to establish secure communications, and store and transmit sensitive data, like passwords, authentication information, credit card numbers… and it is very extensively used in many applications, like those involving bank payments, to protect the user's’ information.

However, while here we will talk about its applications to internet communication, cryptography exists since before the internet. One of the best known examples is the Enigma code used by the German military during World War II, which was broken by the codebreakers at Bletchley Park, with the notable contribution of Alan Turing. If we go further back we can find evidence of cryptography since several millennia ago.

Encryption is one of the methods we can use to protect our privacy. These are some of the possibilities:

1. Encryption of stored data:
  a. Storage devices (hard disks, flash drives, etc): we can encrypt whole storage units, not allowing access to them from a different computer or without a password. We can also encrypt specific partitions of the unit. It is also possible to encrypt certain files or directories so you don’t need to desencrypt everything every time. We can find programs that can encrypt our data, and some operating systems also offer this possibility, but be sure to remember how to desencrypt it afterwards!
  b. Password protection: We can protect some of our files with a password. Some programs, like LibreOffice or Acrobat allow you to directly save your files with password protection. There are also some programs like 7-Zip that compress and encrypt any of your files. This kind of encryption is not the most secure, but it can suffice for many uses.
2. Encrypted emails: our emails are easy to intercept, so if we want to keep these messages private we have several options. To start with, we can encrypt any attached documents to the email, allowing only the intended recipient access to it. There are also several services which offer encryption of the messages themselves.

#### B. Wifi Sniffers
A packet analyzer or sniffer is a program that intercepts and analyzes packets that travel through a given network.

There is a lot of traffic that carries confidential information, and, in many cases, it is not encrypted. In this case, a sniffer might intercept it and steal the information for someone else.

There are many kinds of sniffers used for a variety of things, but here we will focus on Wi-Fi sniffers. These sniffers can be introduced, for example, in open Wi-Fi networks in order to monitor unencrypted traffic generated by any user who connects to it.

The following advice should be taken into account when connecting to a Wi-Fi network, especially an open one, since most do not encrypt the communications.

1. Don’t connect automatically to public Wi-Fi networks and avoid them in general.
2. When using a public Wi-Fi network, access only secure services (like websites that use HTTPS).
3. When using a public Wi-Fi network, try to exchange the least amount of personal data possible and avoid connecting to personal accounts.
