IV. Cookies
1. Introduction
Welcome to this new course on Internet privacy! Make yourself at home, we’re going to give you a 101 course on a topic you’ve surely seen on the Internet: cookies.

You’ve probably seen banners on websites that ask you to accept cookies. Some even force you to accept cookies in order to continuing browsing on the site. But, what on earth are cookies and why are they so important? Beside being a delicious baking goodie, which sadly is not the case here, a cookie is basically a file stored on your browser, which Internet sites can create in order to write them and read them any time you enter the website. Let’s see an example of how it works!

Imagine you want to buy a collar for your lovely dog, and you look for a great sale on the Internet. If you go to your favourite online shopping platform, you probably log in, or maybe you’ll be already logged in from a previous time. And when you’re exploring among those quite beautiful collars for a low price, looking for the fanciest accessory for your furry friend, the website won’t ask you your account information again and again every time the page refreshes to show you something new. It will just remember. But, how? That’s where cookies take part.

When you enter the site for the first time (the actual first time ever), the web page creates a file with your information: a cookie. Picture there are various languages available, so you choose your native language. The website takes that information and stores it in this file called cookie to know your preferences from now on, and so it can refrain from asking it again when you come back. It will just have to read it. Exactly the same happens with your account. When you sign in, your information is stored too, so no matter how many searches you make or how many products you click, when the sites needs to refresh to show you something new, it can keep you logged in because it can read the necessary information on the cookie. Websites uses cookies to write down the necessary stuff in order to remember.

But that’s not all that can be written down. After exploring the page browsing some collars, information like your prefered collars, their prices, and what you actually bought may be stored in the cookie. Because of this, more information than you could actually want to is stored into the cookie, information that later on can be used to show you advertisements based on your searches.

In short, cookies offer us both good and bad things. They usually expire and are automatically deleted after some time, but here we will teach you more about them and how to control them.

2. About cookies
A. Origins and types
We have seen more or less what cookies are, but where do they come from?

Its origins can be traced back to 1994, when Netscape Communications employee Leo Montulli used them in order to implement a virtual shopping cart for an e-commerce site. This way, the servers did not have to store any information about this, since it was done in the shopper’s browser.

This leads us to the first kind of cookies we will be considering: session cookies. These cookies, which are usually used to store credentials and such information, and expire very quickly, since they are normally deleted when you close your browser session.

In contraposition to session cookies we can find persistent cookies, which are those that expire at a certain date or after a fixed amount of time. They can be used to keep a user logged in when they don’t want to re-enter the password every time, but it is very common to use them for advertising purposes, since they can store your activity to be able to show you “personalized advertisements”. They can also be used for data collection and to personalize your settings in certain sites.

Another important type of cookie (independent of the previous separation) is third-party cookies. These are cookies which are not sent to us by the website we are visiting but by a third party who has some component inside this website, like an advertisement banner. These cookies can then be read by third parties as you navigate through the websites, potentially tracking all this activity. They can be used, for example for personalized advertising.

Lately there has been some talk about something called “supercookies”. These, however, work quite differently from regular cookies, and they are much more difficult to control. If you still want to know more about them we encourage you to find out.

B. Downsides and dangers
We have seen that cookies can be used to make our online experience more comfortable. However, they can also have downsides.

One of the most common criticisms towards cookies is that they invade our privacy. Many cookies are designed to get the maximum amount of information. For example, as we saw before, third-party cookies track your behavior across multiple domains, and some of these cookies can be in our browsers for long periods of time, so we have to ask ourselves how much privacy we want.

Cookies can also be dangerous when handled carelessly. For example, when we use a computer that is also used by somebody else, we must be careful not to leave behind any cookie with sensitive information, like authentication details of some account. If the person who uses that computer after us is nice, they might only use these cookies to prank us from our own account, be they also have the power to impersonate you or scam you.

Lastly, cookies can have security vulnerabilities. For example, normal HTTP cookies can be intercepted by anyone if we don’t use a secure connection. This does not happen, however, with secure cookies, only transferable through HTTPS, although can also compromise your data if otherwise stolen. Other problems can arise with not properly implemented cookies and out-of-date browsers.

3. Controlling cookies
Nowadays, almost every website uses cookies for a variety of reasons, but if you want to have more control over them you can follow some of the following advice:
Modify your browser settings or use add-ons to control which cookies are stored by your browser. You can also eliminate the cookies already stored.
Use private browsing options like the “Incognito” mode in Chrome or “Private Browsing” in Firefox. That way, all the cookies will be deleted at the end of every session (when you close all the windows).
Be careful to never leave cookies with sensitive information on computers used by other people. For example, if you log into some service, do so using a private browsing mode or delete the cookies afterwards.
Keep your browser up to date and only give personal information to trusted sites.

4. Group activities
A. Game
The following game can be played throughout the course, during a part of it or during the other group activity.

The participants will “act as cookies”. First, we randomly and secretly distribute the names of the participants among themselves, so that everyone has someone else, but that person doesn’t know. Then, throughout the elected duration of the game, each will record the activity of the person they have been assigned, writing down things like when they raise their hands, what they talk about, if they look at their phones, and so on.

At the end, everyone will talk about what they have written down, and the person it refers to will say how this “surveillance” has made them feel, whether it has affected their behavior, etc.

B. Debate
During this activity, we invite the participant to debate about a number of topics. Here are some suggestions, but the participants are also invited to make suggestions of their own:
What do we consider desirable and undesirable uses of cookies? What do you think companies use them for?
If we are monitored through cookies and thus our advertising and even search results are affected by our previous activities, do we feel uncomfortable? Do we feel manipulated? Or does it just make our navigation easier and focused on our interests?

5. Summary
The following game can be played throughout the course, during a part of it or during the other group activity.

The participants will “act as cookies”. First, we randomly and secretly distribute the names of the participants among themselves, so that everyone has someone else, but that person doesn’t know. Then, throughout the elected duration of the game, each will record the activity of the person they have been assigned, writing down things like when they raise their hands, what they talk about, if they look at their phones, and so on.

At the end, everyone will talk about what they have written down, and the person it refers to will say how this “surveillance” has made them feel, whether it has affected their behavior, etc.
