##2. Knowing your digital footprint

#### A. What is your digital footprint made of?
Your digital footprint is all the stuff you leave behind as you use the Internet, things such as websites, online shopping logs, forum registrations, e-mails and attachments, uploaded videos or digital images and any other form of transmission of information, all of which leaves traces of personal information about yourself available to others online. Some of this data are cookies that are stored in our browser and stores information about our accounts and maybe our navigation habits. Some of them, like posts, comments and likes or retweets, come from our use of social media, which in many cases may be less private than we thought and we’d want to. Some websites may even track which devices log in using the same account, although we should consider that sometimes this makes our access more secure and not less.

Despite this apparent of lack of privacy, not everything is bad. If you think about it, we all also leave a footprint in the real world. We share our tastes, our opinions and our affection to our loved ones. Exactly the same happens in the digital world except that on the Internet all this is usually more public and can potentially reach anyone. We express ourselves on the Internet, we do our daily tasks as we would do in the real world and get in touch with the ones we care about. Our digital footprint is usually a reflection of our lives, including all the good stuff as well.

Also, not everything on the Internet is created for mean purposes. Social networks help us connect with others in many ways, cookies are what make possible logging into diverse accounts and even shopping online, and usage statistics may be collected in order to improve the service. You can also choose what you post so it gives a good image of yourself and grants you a good reputation for anyone looking.

#### B. Data leaks
In the same way your personal belongings can be stolen in real life, your data can also be stolen on the Internet. Currently, some of the ways your data can be stolen are malware and sniffers. Malware is any kind of malicious software that tries to infect an electronic device to steal information, among other reasons. Malware access to your computer through the Internet and usually makes infected devices slow, and can be detected and suppressed using an antivirus. Sniffers are programs that examine the data traveling through a specific network. Sniffers are more effective on public WiFi, because data is traveling through the air and anyone can access to the network and, with the right program, see what’s happening there. If the data is encoded, the connection will be safe, but this is not generally the case.

Also, your data may be compromised if you store data in the cloud. There have been some cases of celebrities having their data stolen from their personal clouds. This leads us to the following question: Is it safe to store our data in the cloud? Companies that provide cloud storage services tend to spend time and resources improving their security policies. Encoding, two step verification… there are multiple ways to improve their security, but anything can be hacked with enough time and resources (though the amount time and resources needed may be disproportionate). Also, passwords can be leaked due to users’ mistakes, compromising our data. 

Although there are services that can be pretty reliable, it will be always safer to have that data in a hard drive, even more if the device is off or not connected to the internet. The safest would be not having data stored anywhere, but we need somewhere to store our stuff. So, as in real life, we need to protect it.

#### C. What is your data used for?
Your data is worth a lot of money. Literally. Your data can be helpful to build a really accurate, precise and detailed profile of you, and this is like a gold mine for publicity agencies. Because of this, there are enterprises that organize, analyze and pack all the information from our digital footprint in order to create leads, in other words, profiles made with verified data. They may even use special offers to collect data directly from the users via forms. Then they send these leads to publicity agencies for several dollars each, so they can use it in order to target specific users and send them the offers that they may like the most. That’s why we get emails from websites we haven’t heard about with offers that can interest us.

Also, your data may be used in a malicious way. Your personal data like accounts, passwords, credit cards or bank accounts can be hacked, collected and sold between malicious individuals or criminal groups that can take your place. Also, in a more extreme scenario, your personal data, like your real name, your home address or other data from you or your relatives can be used to trick you or blackmail you.

